maintext.md, before:

% An evolutionary perspective on the biogeography of species interactions
% T. Poisot, K. Cazelles, D. Gravel
% DRAFT

# Introduction

Arguably the biggest challenge faced by community ecologists is to understand,
and predict, how ecosystem properties will change in the face of
large-scale disturbance events. Ecosystems functions emerge from both
the identity of local species, and the way they interact, in a given
environmental context. Species range shift, micro-evolutionary
changes, and rapid environmental variation, is therefore expected to
disrupt the current state of communities, and thus change the way
ecosystems function. Although hypotheses have been generated, and data
gathered, regarding the relationship between community structure and
ecosystem properties, it is not clear whether they are sufficient to
*predict*  the outcome of large-scale changes. The core issue lies in
the fact that emerging communities, rather than being an additive
combination of existing ones (*e.g.* species from site A relocate to
site B to track their temperature optimum), will be entirely
novel ones. This novelty will emerge through a variety of ecological
and micro-evolutionary mechanisms. **(i)** Species will use different
tactics to cope with change, that can result in any combination of
range shift, and rapid adaptation. **(ii)** Because of the precedent
point, this will result in either new species entering existing
interaction networks, or establishing different interactions within
them. Finally, **(iii)**, the environmental conditions themselves will
change, affecting the traits, abundances, and presence of different
species. Because all of these mechanisms are interwoven in feedbacks,
the way we approach them should incorporate concepts and elements from
separate bodies of work, and focus on understanding which are
well-articulated, and which are not.

1. Literature on species interactions at the community level neglected variation in either species, or the way they interact
2. Accounting for species interaction is needed to predict biogeo distribution and response to global changes
3. Accounting for micro-evolutionary changes is important to predict response to global changes as well
4. The establishment of interactions relies on traits (mis)matching, so the consequences of biogeo/evo changes must be done in a trait-explicit framework

**Last paragraph**:   In this paper, we discuss aspects of ecological network
theory, environmental and historical biogeography, and coevolution, that can be
integrated in order to predict and descrive the dynamics of interaction
networks. Interestingly, most of the groundwork is already present, and we call
for a synthesis effort, aiming at the integration of disparate elements of
theory, models, and data. We propose that future research on the dynamics of
networks, be it temporal, spatial, or evolutionary, be guided by the role of
species trait in determining the existence of interactions. 

**Box:**: venn diagram   
**Box:** case studies (if any)

# The state of the art

In this part, we showcase the elements of network theory, biogeography, and
coevolution studies that are necesary to achieve an integration between the
three fields. 

**we don't discuss the overlap yet**: think of this as the basic ingredients of
the integration, not how we will integrate them

## Network theory:

Dom

Constraints on species presence / absence, species dynamics, involve functional traits

Jenn / Memmott : robustness, species extinction cascades, pressure to select the more robust network (indirectly) -- the probability of extinction of one species varies with the risk of extinction of other species below it

## Biogeography:

D.J. Kev'

large scale variations, species presence f(environment), predicts community composition, spatial heterogeneity, consequences for species evolution (at the single species scale)

evolutionary/historical biogeography: Dom will do a synthesis of the TREE paper

Discuss Pillai, Gonzalez & Loreau: interactions constrain co-distribution

## Coevolution: 

TP -- feedbacks between species traits and interactions: is essentially an evolution of constraints on species distribution

In its contemporary incarnation, coevolution studies the interactions between
pairs of species composed of (potentially) genetically differentiated
populations, which may be connected by gene-flow (dispersal). Theory
surrounding coevolutions aims at finding mechanisms that links traits and their
genetic architecture to the distribution of interaction outcomes
[@thompson_raw_1999], so as to predict the impact of trait distribution on
species interactions, and the impact of interactions on the evolution of trait
distribution. Of particular interest to our goal is the central concept that
(i) covariance in trait species will determine the distribution of interaction
outcomes (that is the distribution of interaction strenght, in a network
perspective), and (ii) the covariance between interaction outcome and
trait distribution will drive the evolution of the trait in one or both species
[@gomulkiewicz_dos_2007].

%TODO review examples

Although the notion that traits drive the existence and strength of species
interactions in networks, there has been extremely few studies that attempted
to understand the consequences of network structure on trait distribution in
the different species. As we discuss in a later section, this is in part
because most studies focused on understanding how network structure emerged
from evolutionary processes and trait distribution, without going full circle
to asking the question of how network structure drives coevolutionary dynamics.
@yoder_when_2010 makes the proposition that the ability of coevolution to
trigger an increase in diversity was contingent upon the type of ecological
interactions, with mutualistic interactions generating the least diversity.
However, it is worth noting that this model, as most empirical studies, focused
on situations in which species richness is low, and it is therefore worth
asking how the multiple interactions that a species establishes within
a network represents different selection pressures and diversification
opportunity. The idea that multi-species interactions affect both coevolutionar
dynamics [@thrall_coevolution_2007] and the number of interaction partners
[@poisot_conceptual_2011] has been well established in the recent years,
offering the rationale and opportunity to further understand how network
structure and coevolutionary dynamics interact.

# The current overlap

## The good: biogeographic perspectives on coevolution

TP -- GMTC, Nuismer models

## The bad: understanding network variation over space

DG/KC -- TTIB, beta

## The ugly: evolution of networks, evolution in networks

TP -- Loeuille, web world, Cattin, Allesina

discuss micro-evolution / macro-evolution (phylo Daniel, paleo Jenn, Roopnarine, taxo Allesina)

# The road to synthesis

## Scaling-up coevolutionary concepts

limitation as a micro-evo perspective

## Scaling-down the species interaction network paradigm

interactions are complex probabilistic proccesses

# Perspectives

How do we switch from no network (autotrophs) to a network (heterotrophy): important qualitative change, intermediate steps?

Discuss the relevance of fundamental/realized versus Grinnell/Elton niches (ugly Ecol Lett figure)

Traits are the future, all hail the traits

No grand theory of everything

new family of questions vs. re-visiting standing questions

# References

Commit message:

notes on GMTC and important systems to review

maintext.md, after:

% An evolutionary perspective on the biogeography of species interactions
% T. Poisot, K. Cazelles, D. Gravel
% DRAFT

# Introduction

Arguably the biggest challenge faced by community ecologists is to understand,
and predict, how ecosystem properties will change in the face of
large-scale disturbance events. Ecosystems functions emerge from both
the identity of local species, and the way they interact, in a given
environmental context. Species range shift, micro-evolutionary
changes, and rapid environmental variation, is therefore expected to
disrupt the current state of communities, and thus change the way
ecosystems function. Although hypotheses have been generated, and data
gathered, regarding the relationship between community structure and
ecosystem properties, it is not clear whether they are sufficient to
*predict*  the outcome of large-scale changes. The core issue lies in
the fact that emerging communities, rather than being an additive
combination of existing ones (*e.g.* species from site A relocate to
site B to track their temperature optimum), will be entirely
novel ones. This novelty will emerge through a variety of ecological
and micro-evolutionary mechanisms. **(i)** Species will use different
tactics to cope with change, that can result in any combination of
range shift, and rapid adaptation. **(ii)** Because of the precedent
point, this will result in either new species entering existing
interaction networks, or establishing different interactions within
them. Finally, **(iii)**, the environmental conditions themselves will
change, affecting the traits, abundances, and presence of different
species. Because all of these mechanisms are interwoven in feedbacks,
the way we approach them should incorporate concepts and elements from
separate bodies of work, and focus on understanding which are
well-articulated, and which are not.

1. Literature on species interactions at the community level neglected variation in either species, or the way they interact
2. Accounting for species interaction is needed to predict biogeo distribution and response to global changes
3. Accounting for micro-evolutionary changes is important to predict response to global changes as well
4. The establishment of interactions relies on traits (mis)matching, so the consequences of biogeo/evo changes must be done in a trait-explicit framework

**Last paragraph**:   In this paper, we discuss aspects of ecological network
theory, environmental and historical biogeography, and coevolution, that can be
integrated in order to predict and descrive the dynamics of interaction
networks. Interestingly, most of the groundwork is already present, and we call
for a synthesis effort, aiming at the integration of disparate elements of
theory, models, and data. We propose that future research on the dynamics of
networks, be it temporal, spatial, or evolutionary, be guided by the role of
species trait in determining the existence of interactions. 

**Box:**: venn diagram   
**Box:** case studies (if any)

# The state of the art

In this part, we showcase the elements of network theory, biogeography, and
coevolution studies that are necesary to achieve an integration between the
three fields. 

**we don't discuss the overlap yet**: think of this as the basic ingredients of
the integration, not how we will integrate them

## Network theory:

Dom

Constraints on species presence / absence, species dynamics, involve functional traits

Jenn / Memmott : robustness, species extinction cascades, pressure to select the more robust network (indirectly) -- the probability of extinction of one species varies with the risk of extinction of other species below it

## Biogeography:

D.J. Kev'

large scale variations, species presence f(environment), predicts community composition, spatial heterogeneity, consequences for species evolution (at the single species scale)

evolutionary/historical biogeography: Dom will do a synthesis of the TREE paper

Discuss Pillai, Gonzalez & Loreau: interactions constrain co-distribution

## Coevolution: 

In its contemporary incarnation, coevolution studies the interactions between
pairs of species composed of (potentially) genetically differentiated
populations, which may be connected by gene-flow (dispersal). Theory
surrounding coevolutions aims at finding mechanisms that links traits and their
genetic architecture to the distribution of interaction outcomes
[@thompson_raw_1999], so as to predict the impact of trait distribution on
species interactions, and the impact of interactions on the evolution of trait
distribution. Of particular interest to our goal is the central concept that
(i) covariance in trait species will determine the distribution of interaction
outcomes (that is the distribution of interaction strenght, in a network
perspective), and (ii) the covariance between interaction outcome and
trait distribution will drive the evolution of the trait in one or both species
[@gomulkiewicz_dos_2007].

%TODO review examples

Although the notion that traits drive the existence and strength of species
interactions in networks, there has been extremely few studies that attempted
to understand the consequences of network structure on trait distribution in
the different species. As we discuss in a later section, this is in part
because most studies focused on understanding how network structure emerged
from evolutionary processes and trait distribution, without going full circle
to asking the question of how network structure drives coevolutionary dynamics.
@yoder_when_2010 makes the proposition that the ability of coevolution to
trigger an increase in diversity was contingent upon the type of ecological
interactions, with mutualistic interactions generating the least diversity.
However, it is worth noting that this model, as most empirical studies, focused
on situations in which species richness is low, and it is therefore worth
asking how the multiple interactions that a species establishes within
a network represents different selection pressures and diversification
opportunity. The idea that multi-species interactions affect both coevolutionar
dynamics [@thrall_coevolution_2007] and the number of interaction partners
[@poisot_conceptual_2011] has been well established in the recent years,
offering the rationale and opportunity to further understand how network
structure and coevolutionary dynamics interact.

# The current overlap

## The good: biogeographic perspectives on coevolution

TP -- GMTC, Nuismer models

Since @thompson_geographic_2005 proposed the concept of a *geographic mosaic of
selections*, that is the fact that selection varies across space as a function
of local environmental conditions, the concepts of coevolution have been well
understood in a spatial context. **REVIEW main concepts of GMTC**

Emblematic systems: crossbills, yucca moth

## The bad: understanding network variation over space

DG/KC -- TTIB, beta

## The ugly: evolution of networks, evolution in networks

TP -- Loeuille, web world, Cattin, Allesina

discuss micro-evolution / macro-evolution (phylo Daniel, paleo Jenn, Roopnarine, taxo Allesina)

# The road to synthesis

## Scaling-up coevolutionary concepts

limitation as a micro-evo perspective

## Scaling-down the species interaction network paradigm

interactions are complex probabilistic proccesses

# Perspectives

How do we switch from no network (autotrophs) to a network (heterotrophy): important qualitative change, intermediate steps?

Discuss the relevance of fundamental/realized versus Grinnell/Elton niches (ugly Ecol Lett figure)

Traits are the future, all hail the traits

No grand theory of everything

new family of questions vs. re-visiting standing questions

# References
